---
title: Mandatory Fun
date: 2020-04-10 14:12:45
tags:
---

I am a to do list person: few things are more satisfying to me than getting to check an item off my omnipresent list. I like to start my day with a selection of items highlighted to accomplish, and my days often end by reviewing and re-prioritizing in preparation to repeat the process. To facilitate my workflow (and keep track of my life in general) I maintain my lists on Google Keep; I find it convenient, simple, and well-integrated with the devices I interact with daily. In addition to my completing items on my personal checklist I find I can get this same satisfaction at work: I think that many engineers can relate to the feeling of moving a JIRA (or any other task-tracker) ticket from _In-Progress_ to _Done_. It's another form of checking off an item, and I find it just as intrinsically rewarding.

As an aside, I've noticed that my desire to complete tasks influences my favorite chores: I vastly prefer those that can be started and completed in a single session. I remember from my childhood that my favorite household chore was refilling the salt and pepper shakers. The task was short, simple, and useful, it could be started and completed in a matter of minutes and made me feel accomplished upon completion. I keep a stable of tasks of similar size in reserve in order that I can use them to build momentum for finishing larger tasks. I've written in the past about the power of momentum and its relationship to finishing things, to read some of those thoughts [click here.](https://elijahverdoorn.com/2020/02/12/doing-less-to-drive-doing-more/)

A consequence of chasing this checklist-induced high is a tendency to wear myself out. I sometimes struggle to truly relax, in these times I battle a nagging voice telling me that "you could (and should) be working". In most situations I know that I am blessed to have been raised to value my strong work ethic, it has taken me to the point I'm at in my life and with any luck will continue to serve me. I have no doubt that being wound a little tight is healthier than living life too fast and loose, but it comes with it's own set of challenges (especially when my job is conducive to working from anywhere at any time). In order to be maximally happy I need to continue to work on balancing my time and efforts between personal projects that I find satisfying, work tasks, and leisurely pursuit of my hobbies. When I have down time I play video games, watch movies and TV, exercise, ride my motorcycle, cook, play music, and read. Spending time on these activities fulfills me, energizes me, distracts me from my troubles, and brings me joy.

I am more productive, happier, more confident, less anxious, and generally the best version of myself when I dedicate time to indulging in my hobbies. "Grinding it out" to get more work done, either personal or professional, while ignoring the very human need for balance between work and play is counter-productive, exhausting, and reduces my ability to do my best work. Sometimes I feel selfish spending this time on myself, but then I remember that in doing so I am making myself a more pleasant person to be around for the important people in my life. I continually ask myself, knowing all this to be true, why I struggle at times with the feeling of needing to be "getting something done" or "making progress" when I logically know that I do have the time to relax? I'm still working daily to discover the answer to this question and to identify strategies for taking action to improve; I have been and continue to work on self-examining and reflecting on these parts of my psyche. In the course of this reflection I'm working on being more kind to myself, feeling more free to let down, and allowing myself the time to recover from the stresses of life when I need to. 

Taking steps towards improvement starts with a plan and I know from practical experience that, ironically, I will do better and enjoy myself more in my unstructured time if I give it a bit of structure! In order to provide that structure I have turned to my trusty to do list. Beginning with the simple idea that to do lists are not necessarily exclusively for "work" items I've begun adding "fun" activities to my lists and completing these as I would any other item. It may seem odd to onlookers, but for me this strategy has been remarkably successful. As a result I am not only spending more time on the things in my life that make me happy, but also more deeply enjoying the time that I do spend on these activities. I find the nagging voice pressuring me to "stop wasting time" is easier to manage (although not totally gone), my stress around not accomplishing enough has been reduced, and I go to bed happier feeling satisfied with both my accomplishments and my down time. I'm proud of my incremental progress in this regard and thankful that I have been able to make the necessary observations about myself and my habits before I experienced any extremely negative effects of the burn-out that is all too common in my line of work.

I've been experimenting with a few different variants of what I'm calling my "mandatory fun" framework. The first version that I tried recently was to simply add the word "Fun" to my general list. I'm sure that some observers would have laughed had they seen my list but I'm happy to say that it was successful (and nobody really looks at my boring lists anyway)! To further my commitment to following through (and reduce the "what do I do now?" feeling) when I arrived at the fun item on my list I referenced a separate list of the options that I had available to me, diving head-first into the one that was most attractive to me at the time. I liked the flexibility to choose what I did with my time and was happy to have proven the overall theory to myself. Already, this framework is a successful step forward.

Following this success I've also tried adding a specific activity to my list rather than just "fun" in general. My latest example of this has been baking: I love experimenting with new recipes, trying out new techniques, and sharing my creations with friends and family. I've done this with video games too: my latest game purchase was the Halo Master Chief Collection and I've found completing a level (or two) on my list on more than one occasion. This variation was inspired by learning more about S.M.A.R.T. goal setting: I'm satisfying more of the parameters of this type of goal by being more specific and timeboxing my fun tasks. I've identified that I do well having a goal, an end in sight, and the ability to budget time around accomplishing these goals within my day. This observation has been immensely powerful for me and recognizing it allows me to set myself up for success in as many situations as possible. The success I've experienced has encouraged me to to continue to iterate on this framework for myself, with the eventual goal of not needing to write out "Fun" and rather being more naturally balanced with my work and play.

Going forward I'm going to continue to iterate on my mandatory fun framework, keeping in mind how I approach the concept of my to do list in general. I am also taking these reflective ideas into as many areas of my life as I can: I want to continue to grow and develop as a professional, but not at the expense of growing as a person. Doing both in parallel serves to accelerate my progress in each and makes me an overall more balanced, levelheaded, and whole person.
